I'm Ben Nham.
I'm an engineer on the
iOS performance team.
I'll be joined in a bit by my colleague,
Tim Lee,
who is also an engineer on our team.
And we've been working on performance
for the last three or four years.
And we're going to talk about improving
your app's responsiveness today.
So we're going to talk about two topics.
One is responsiveness,
and that's how quickly your
app responds to user events.
So you really want your application to
respond to things like touch events,
accelerometer events,
and so forth quickly so
that they feel like they're
interacting with a real object.
And we're also going to be
talking about performance.
That's how to make your
app do work efficiently.
We're going to look at that
in a few different contexts.
One,
the real key to this talk is to measure
and profile your app for performance.
So we'll be going over a couple of
profiling tools and showing you how
to use them to make your app faster.
We'll also look at a
couple of key scenarios.
One is fast app launch.
That's the first user event in your app.
We'll also be looking at how to
make your app respond to events
faster once it's already launched.
And we'll also give you a few
key performance strategies that
that you can apply to your app,
whatever performance
problem you might have.
So let's talk about a workflow
for fixing performance problems.
It's really like fixing
any other problem.
The first step is to
reproduce the problem,
just like you have with any other bug.
And once you've reproduced the problem,
hopefully you can time it,
get some sort of number,
like a wall clock time,
frames per second, network throughput,
whatever it may be.
Hopefully you get some sort of one number
that you can keep going back to to make
sure you're making forward progress.
The next step is to profile
your app with some of our tools,
say instruments.
And once you take a look at the
time profile or the system trace
or whatever profiling tool you use,
hopefully you come up with some
hypothesis of what's wrong.
And sometimes you'll only get
some sort of general hypothesis,
like, "Well,
this doesn't seem like a CPU problem.
Maybe it's really a GPU problem.
It's a graphics problem.
I should use a different instrument,
like the core animation instrument."
So you might go around in a cycle
with sort of a general hypothesis
and then more narrow hypothesis.
And hopefully, eventually,
you'll figure out something
to do to fix your application.
And once you make the fix,
you come back to reproducing the problem.
If it doesn't reproduce and you
measure it and it's gotten better,
you're done.
Otherwise,
you go around in this loop again until
your performance problem is fixed.
So we'll be going over this workflow
in all our performance talks today.
Let's take a look at how that
applies to a key performance
scenario like application launch.
So why is application
launch so important?
Well, the first reason is it's the
first thing that the user does.
They'll tap your icon,
and they'll expect a responsive
user interface really quickly.
And really what you're shooting
for is a really fast app launch,
like, say, 400 or 500 milliseconds,
because that's how long the
application zoom animation takes.
And we launch your app concurrently
with the zoom animation.
So if you can actually
launch that quickly,
to the user, it seems like your app
has launched instantly.
Of course,
your app might do nontrivial work,
so it might be hard to get to 400,
500 milliseconds,
but that's really the goal
at the end of the day.
So that's sort of the carrot.
Users love fast app launch times.
What's the stick?
Well, the system really dislikes
slow app launch times.
And so if you launch in 20 seconds,
we'll actually terminate your app.
That's the system watchdog at work.
And you really want to avoid that
because that's a really bad user
experience where the user taps your
app and it just shows a loading
screen and then just terminates.
And of course,
users often give up before 20 seconds.
So you really want to be on
the low end of this scale.
Just one thing to note is that if you're
running in the debugger from Xcode,
the watchdog will be disabled so
we can attach with the debugger.
So you have to launch the app like a real
user would to get this timeout behavior.
[Transcript missing]
So one way of measuring the
launch time using logging,
as I said, is to set a global, say,
start time in main and save to
that global in your first line.
And then after you get the application
did finish launching callback,
when you get that callback,
it doesn't mean your application
has actually finished launching.
It means that we're giving control
to your app to do all the work that
it needs to do to finish launching.
So you might think that, well,
it'd be valid to just stop
the timer at the end of
application did finish launching.
But actually,
because of the way the system works,
all the initial layout and
drawing doesn't happen until
after you've returned from
application did finish launching.
So that's why in the first
line of this callback,
I've actually used dispatch async to
sort of end the time of the end of
the timer after that work that happens
after application did finish launching.
So.
That's a little tricky,
so I wanted to point it out here.
Another way to measure launch
time is to use Time Profiler.
A lot of people don't know
about the CPU Strategy View,
so I'll be demonstrating that today.
And what that will show you is
every single call stack that
Time Profiler has taken over time.
And you can actually search
through those call stacks.
So the idea here would be to search
for this ReportAppLaunchFinished
method and look for the very last
sample with that call stack in it.
And that's where you can sort of endpoint
the launch time of your application,
at least if you care about that now.
If you care about something else,
like when the shutter button is able,
you'll have to search for that instead.
So this is a little
easier to demonstrate,
so I'm going to head over here to
show you how to take a time profile.
So just to make this a
little more interesting and
show you a real application,
we're going to actually be
looking at the WWDC app.
And the first thing I want
to show you is how to report
the launch time via logging.
So as you can see, I've declared a global
up here for start time,
and in the first line in main,
I've I've stored the current time to it.
In my app delegates,
application did finish launching.
This probably belongs in a header.
I've just put it here just
so it's all in one place.
But I've declared that the
start time global exists.
And then, as I said,
I dispatch async back to the main queue.
And that's so that I'm
measuring the launch time.
I'm taking into account the layout and
drawing that happens after you return
from application did finish launching.
And all this is going to do is report
the launch time to the console.
So let's build and run this.
And you can see that the
current application launch
time is reported down here.
It says it launched in 1.15 seconds,
so that's actually pretty good because,
as I said, the animation is 500
milliseconds on a iPad.
And this should be actually
pretty reproducible.
Now, note that the output down here
is from running with a debugger.
You probably want to run this, you know,
not in the debugger,
and then you'll see the output
in the Xcode Organizer console.
And just to convince you,
I'm actually looking at the Xcode app.
So all I did was launch the
Xcode app and a launch time
appeared in my system console.
So that should be relatively repeatable.
That's one number you can keep going
back to as you work on launch time.
As you keep making improvements,
hopefully that launch time
keeps going down and down.
Now let's talk about how
to take a time profile.
So I've already built the application
and uploaded it to my iPad,
so I'm just going to start
Instruments as a separate program.
And I've selected time profile.
There are a few options I like to use.
So one of them is in File,
Record Options.
So there's this option
called Deferred Mode.
That basically minimizes the overhead
of the trace because by default you
might have noticed that Instruments
sort of interactively displays
the profile as you're taking it.
This will just put up a block out
screen that you'll see while taking the
trace so that overhead is minimized.
Also by default,
a lot of people attach to one process.
I'm just going to profile all processes
because it's also relatively efficient.
And sometimes your application
has some interesting interactions
with other system processes.
So for instance,
if you wrote an app that gets events
from the user's events database,
that'll talk to a calendar
access daemon and so forth.
So sometimes it's just good to see
all the processes that are running.
So I'm just going to hit record now.
Launch wwc.app.
Okay,
something is going a little awry here,
so I'll bring up one of my backup traces.
So this is what you would see
after taking the time profile.
You would see a screen that
looks something like this.
So what this purple at the
top shows CPU usage over time.
And what this is saying is,
might be hard to see, but in the WWC app,
we spent two seconds of CPU time.
Now,
As I was saying,
one of the features of Time Profile
that a lot of people don't know about
is this CPU strategy view up here.
That's this button at the left.
And that'll show you every single
call stack sampled over time.
So by default, we'll sample the call
stack every millisecond.
And if you switch over
to the sample list here,
you can actually see every
single call stack over time.
Now,
another feature that's kind of handy,
let's say we want to figure out the
launch time from the time profile.
We can restrict the trace
to just WWC's main thread by
clicking on this thread picker.
And I'm going to click
on WWC's main thread.
And as you can see,
we've highlighted only the stacks that
have to do with the WABC main thread.
So there's a lot of other stuff
going on in this system other
than the main thread of WABC.
So the beginning of app launch,
let's say it happens around here.
You can see the first highlighted
call stack is about -- it's about
It's at about 2.265 milliseconds.
And let's say we want to find
what's happening-- Let's say we
want to find the end of app launch,
the end of the first layout and draw.
So as I said,
We can search all the call stacks here.
We can search for report
app launch finished.
And that'll actually
show that there were,
in this case, 59 samples with report
app launch finished in it.
And the last one,
you can actually see that
Xcode has moved the inspection
head to about 2.995 seconds.
So 2.265 to 2.995, that's about, say,
750 milliseconds spent launching the app.
So you can, at this point,
you can restrict your trace, let's say,
to just this time period.
If you only care about what happens
until the first layout and draw.
So that's how to use the CPU strategy
view to sort of restrict your
trace to what you're interested in.
And we'll go back to this
trace in just a moment.
As you saw,
there's a lot of information that
comes out of that time profile.
It can be really overwhelming.
So I'm just going to go over some
of the key phases of application
launch so you know when you take
a look at that time profile,
you'll have an idea what
all those functions mean.
So the first thing that happens
in application launch is we have
to do some linking and loading.
So if your application links
against a bunch of frameworks,
and maybe you refer to some
constants in that framework,
we might have to bind to those symbols.
And this all happens before we
even hit main in your application.
So some of the things that you
can do to minimize the time
spent linking and loading.
One is to take a look at which
frameworks you've linked against.
This is in the build phases
section of your Xcode project.
And take a look here because
there's a tendency for frameworks
to sort of accumulate in this list.
Now, in this case, there's only UIKit,
Foundation, and Core Graphics.
That's sort of the bare
minimum that you need.
But there's a tendency for
people to experiment with new
features and add a bunch of
frameworks and never remove them.
And you really want to minimize the
amount of frameworks here because
every single Objective-C framework
you bring in does a little bit of
extra work at link and load time.
So, for instance,
there is a hash table that,
of all classes,
and that has to be populated
at load time based on each
framework that you link against.
And that's how things like
NSClass from String work.
That's how we can do that.
You can actually look up a class
based on a string and give it--give
that class instance to you.
So take a look at your linked frameworks.
Make sure there's nothing
that you don't need there.
Another thing that sometimes
developers get confused with is how
to use the optional frameworks flag.
So we'll say, well,
minimize your linked frameworks,
and then we'll see that someone
has marked UIKit as optional.
And you can't really trick the linker.
You really need UIKit.
So we're going to detect that.
And you really shouldn't use optional
for frameworks that you actually need,
because it has the potential to just
add work to linking and load time.
So that's not the
correct use of optional.
Where you would use optional is,
for instance,
if you're deploying against 5.0,
and you want to link
against a framework like,
say, passkit.framework that
was introduced in iOS 6.
So that's where you would use
the optional flag so that users
on iOS 5 would not error out
looking for a passkit framework.
So that's the proper use
of optional frameworks.
The last thing I want to bring
up is static initializers.
So this is easy to do
with C++ especially.
So a lot of games are written in C++ and
you'll tend to accumulate a lot of global
objects with nontrivial initializers.
And so for instance, in this case,
I have a C++11 statement
that initializes a map,
a standard map.
And what that's going to do is
run the code for the constructor
of standard map at load time,
before you even hit main.
And it's going to go through every single
one of these in all of your object files.
So that's probably not what you want.
That's bringing in a lot of code
before you even do any user work.
So you're forcing the user to pay for
work that they might not even need.
There's ways to do this
in Objective-C and C too,
using the load method, for instance.
So try to avoid those methods.
Avoid static initializers.
You should instead make
objects when you need them.
So Objective-C has a lot
of static initializers.
And there's a class method called
plus_initialize that's great for this,
because plus_initialize is only called
the first time you use the class.
There's a couple gotchas with using it.
So refer to the Objective-C programming
guide to learn how to
use initialize correctly.
But that's--if you need to
set up global and you have a
class that uses that global,
use plus_initialize to initialize
those globals so that it only
happens when you first use the class,
not at load time.
Okay, so after linking and loading,
we have to do some UI kit
initialization for every single app.
That includes things like creating fonts,
creating the first status bar,
reading your user defaults,
Deserializing your main nib.
And that will show up in functions
like UI application initialize,
instantiate singleton, create status bar,
and load main nib file.
So that's where it will
show up in time profiler.
So what can you do to reduce
the amount of time spent in
this part of application launch?
Well, the first is to minimize
the size of your main nib.
And so in this case,
I've got nine top level views,
each with sub views in my nib.
So that's definitely not
the right way to use nibs.
And iOS makes it really easy to
use nibs in the right way because
it really enforces the idea of
one nib per view controller.
So have one nib per view controller.
You can have your view hierarchy for
that view in the view controller.
But definitely don't have something like
this where you have nine top level views,
each with a very complex view hierarchy.
Because we're going to have to
deserialize that entire nib before
we even respond to any user events.
So that's the first thing.
And then the second thing is
to minimize the amount of time
spent in the application launch.
So that's the first thing.
And then the third thing is
to minimize the amount of time
spent in the application launch.
So that's the first thing.
And then the fourth thing is
to minimize the amount of time
spent in the application launch.
So that's the first thing.
And then the fourth thing So minimize
the size of your main Nib.
Also,
one of the things we'll do is we'll look
in your app for certain key preferences.
And underneath the hood,
preferences are implemented
as property lists.
And property lists are great,
but they're not designed
for large amounts of data.
And the reason for that is that,
say you ask preferences
for an object for a key,
because of the way property lists work,
we have to deserialize everything in
your user preferences before we can
hand you back that object for that key.
So if you store large pieces of data,
like in this case a ping image,
inside your user preferences,
we have to go deserialize and
create all those objects in memory,
even before we do any
real work in your app.
So again, use preferences for what
they're meant to be,
for, you know, booleans, integers,
and so forth.
Don't store giant pieces of
objects inside your preferences.
Next,
we'll call back to your application.
So this is really where
your application will--
where we're giving control to
your application to do work.
So first,
we'll call application will finish
launching with options in iOS 6.
Then we'll restore your application
state if you're using that API.
And then we'll call application
did finish launching with options.
So in time profiler, when you see this,
that's where you really have
to concentrate your efforts for
figuring out where hotspots are.
Because this is really where
your app is in control.
And finally, we're gonna do the first
core-animation transaction.
So if you don't know what that means,
that's okay.
This is where we batch up all
the work related to laying
out and drawing your views.
This happens after you return from
application did finish launching.
And as I said, we force this to happen
at least at launch time in
report app launch finished.
It also usually happens implicitly
at the end of the event loop.
So for instance, if you call set needs
display 10 times on a view,
we're not going to actually call
drawRect on that view 10 times.
Instead, we coalesce all those set needs
display until the end of the event
loop when we commit the transaction
and we just draw the view once.
So a lot of people are sort of
mystified by what is this --
what is occurring during commit.
And there's sort of three main
things that you'll see taking time.
One is preparation.
So you'll see as a sub call
inside a CA transaction commit
sort of prepare transaction.
And that's where you'll see things
like decompressing pings and JPEGs if
you set an image on an image view.
The next is layout.
So this is where we
call layout sub views.
And a lot of views have
nontrivial layout sub views.
So for instance,
UI table view in its layout sub views,
that's where it loads new cells.
So that's where you'll see work
related to creating new cells.
And then the last thing we're
going to do is we're going to call
the view sub view and then we're
going to call the view sub view.
And then we're going to
call the view sub view.
So there's a lot of time that we're going
to spend in creating table view cells.
So there is going to -- generally
a good amount of time is spent in
this layout portion of the commit.
And then finally,
after we've laid out your views,
we know where they are,
we know what the size of them are,
we can finally call drawRect if
you've called -- if your -- if your
view implements drawRect because
we know the size of the view.
So again, let's take a look at how
this manifests itself in the
time profile for the WWC app.
So this is the time profile
we just took of the WABC app.
And I'm going to switch back from the
sample list view to the call tree view.
And the sample list view, as I said,
shows what happened over time.
The call tree view shows in
aggregate where time was spent.
I have to clear this filter
at the top right here.
So as you can see,
we spent 700 milliseconds in
the main thread of WWDC during
the application launch.
And I'm just going to walk you through
some of those things I just mentioned.
So in this particular trace,
we spent 26 milliseconds in DYLD.
That's the linking and loading phase.
That's not a lot of time.
As I said,
if you see a lot of time there,
check for static initializers,
check for linking against
a lot of frameworks,
and so forth.
After we've linked and load,
we actually hit Main.
And we do some UI kit initialization.
So UI application initialize,
that's where we'll do things
like reading your user defaults.
UI application instantiate singleton,
that's where we'll make the
UI application singleton
object and your app delegate.
And to continue with
UIKit initialization,
you'll have to expand
this call tree a bit.
And you'll see that we spend some
time creating the status bar and
also loading the main NIM file.
So those are call stacks that are
associated with sort of UI kit
initialization for every app.
Now where we start calling
you back is in this call
initialization delegates for URL.
So as you can see, we called,
did finish launching with options here.
This is where we give hand
control to your application.
So you can see that we spent
400 milliseconds here in
this particular app launch.
And this is where you really need
to focus your investigations.
The other call stack
I want to point out is in,
as I said, Report App Launch Finished.
If you expand this out,
this is where you'll see
the CA transaction commit.
And as I said, there are a few key phases
to see a transaction commit.
One is preparing the commit.
That's where you'll see
deserialization of images.
Laying out and displaying.
In layout, you'll see things like
calling layout subviews,
loading table view cells, and so forth.
And display, that's where you'll see the
callbacks to your app for draw rect.
So I'm not going to go over looking
at this app launch right now because
Tim is going to go over how to look
at this time profile and optimize
some key aspects of WBC in just a bit.
But hopefully that gives you an
idea of where certain key operations
and application launch occur.
Okay, so to summarize,
you want to make sure your
application launches fast because
that's the first user interaction,
and try to get it to be as
instantaneous as possible.
And the way to do that is by
measuring and profiling your
application launch with Time Profiler.
So next we want to give you a few sort
of key performance principles that you
can apply to any performance problem.
And the first one is you
have to profile your app.
Don't guess as to what's slow.
I mean, really,
if there's nothing else you
take back from this talk,
remember to profile your application.
So after you profile your application
and you figure out what's slow,
how do you make it faster?
Well, there's just a bunch of general
performance dos and don'ts.
Don't do it, don't do it again,
do it faster, do it beforehand,
do it afterwards, and do it at scale.
So really the most common performance
optimization is just not doing
whatever takes a long time.
And year in and year out in the labs,
we always ask people
to take time profiles,
system traces, and other profiles,
and we always see some
sort of useless work.
And that can be something graphical
like an unnecessary mask layer,
an unnecessary shadow,
or it could be something database
related like multiple queries for the
exact same data over and over again,
or maybe hundreds of milliseconds
logging or sorting at launch time.
So really take a look
at your time profile,
and more often than not,
if it's the first profile
you've ever taken,
you'll probably see something that you
can really quickly remove and improve
your launch time or your responsiveness.
The next is to not do it again.
So there are certain classes that take
a good amount of time to initialize.
And the most common example
is TableView cells that's
baked right into the API.
We really encourage you to reuse
TableView cells because there's a
method in TableView that actually
lets you get a reused TableView cell.
But there are other classes
that fall into this category.
Things like date and number formatters,
regular expressions, SQLite statements.
And in this case,
once you've made that expensive object,
you should reuse that object instead
of recreating it over and over again.
So for instance, with date formatters,
a common operation is to format a date.
In this case, we want to format
February in a TableView cell.
And if you create that date formatter
in cell4row at index path and
then just immediately release it,
you're going to be paying the
overhead of initializing the date
formatter over and over again.
So really what you want to do is
you want to sort of cache one date
formatter for each date format.
If you do that,
you'll have to invalidate that cached
date formatter when the locale changes.
And note that you can't
really trick the system.
So if you create one date
formatter and just call set date
format on it over and over again,
that's just as slow as creating
date formatters over and over again.
So you really should,
if you're going to use a
date formatter over and over,
keep it around and keep
one date formatter for each
date format in your program.
Another example is with calendars,
NSCalendar.
So this can happen behind your back.
So for instance,
NSLog calls-- creates an NSCalendar
to format that date in the log
line every single time you call it.
So it's not something you want to call
thousands of times on app launch or
when you're responding to a user event.
So don't log every single method
you hit in your application.
I mean, it's fine if you log a few times,
hopefully you don't log at
all on a release build because
your users can't see it anyway.
But for this reason,
avoid calling NSLog excessively.
One real gotcha is that NSCalendar,
current calendar,
actually creates a different
calendar instance every single
time because NSCalendar is mutable.
So this can really get you if you're,
say, in a loop, getting dates from a
calendar for each event,
let's say.
Because it looks like a singleton,
but it's not.
So this is just a
gotcha in the framework.
If you're using current calendar,
save it instead of calling
it over and over again.
And finally, SQLite statements.
They're really actually
little compiled programs.
So you should make sure
to call SQLite3 prepare.
You shouldn't call that over
and over with a format string.
Instead,
use bind parameters and reuse that
prepared statement over and over again.
So what if you just have
to do whatever is slow?
Well, hopefully you can do it faster.
And this really is the domain of...
Correct data structures
and faster algorithms.
This is where your creativity
sort of has to come into play.
So I can't really give you too
many general examples of this,
but one thing you can do,
as I said before,
choose the right data format.
If you're using property lists,
make sure you're using the
binary property list format
and you're not storing a ton
of data in the property list.
Because as I said before,
it's not a lazy format.
If you want one key
from the property list,
you have to create all the objects
in the property list in memory.
If you have really -- if you have
tens of thousands of objects,
you should really be looking
at Core Data or SQLite,
because those are incremental formats.
You can -- if you need one
object from the database,
the database will try to just read
in the set of pages that contain
that data instead of reading in
the entire database into memory.
If you are using SQLite correctly,
I just want to point out there
are a couple callback functions
you can use that are public.
SQLite 3 Trace and SQLite 3
Profile will call you back with
every single query you make,
as well as an estimate of how long
it took to perform that query.
And once you figure out
which query took a long time,
you can use Explain Query
Plan to figure out what SQLite
is doing to satisfy the query.
Another performance strategy:
do it beforehand.
Precompute.
So if you have some sort
of expensive calculation,
you might be able to precompute
it and save it off to disk or
save it in memory somewhere and
reuse it over and over again.
So for instance,
Calendar supports recurring events.
And those recurrences can be
pretty much arbitrarily complex.
You can schedule a meeting every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday of every
month except in February,
or on the last week of every Monday,
Wednesday, Friday of every month.
And that can take quite a long time
when you take into account leap years,
time zones, and so forth.
So the solution we have here is
to pre-expand the recurrences
into objects we call occurrences.
And we'll store those occurrences in
the database so that at launch time,
we're not pre--we're not
expanding any recurrences.
We're just fetching those
pre-expanded recurrences.
Now when you do do this,
beware of memory growth.
Because where this really can hurt you
is if you cache a really large image,
like a screen-sized image.
That's like a 640 by 960
image at 4 bytes per pixel.
If you store that in a static
UI image and it's been decompressed,
you've just blown away
2.4 megabytes of memory.
So that's a really bad pattern.
Really, really,
really think hard if you're
saving large images in global.
You probably should not be doing it.
And we'll have a session later this
afternoon about memory to show you
how to track down these issues.
Another performance strategy,
instead of doing it beforehand,
do it afterwards.
So if you have a lot of data to load,
ideally you can load it synchronously,
but if you have thousands of events that
you just have to load at launch time,
maybe you can use Grand Central Dispatch
to push that work later.
So for instance, in Calendar,
we load all the events asynchronously.
So if you look closely,
we'll put up a responsive user interface.
You can scroll immediately,
and then we'll load that user
interface with events sometime
later in the background.
And finally, do it at scale.
So test your application
with lots of data.
So for instance, the contacts app that
ships with the system,
it scales pretty well with
the amount of contacts.
So for instance,
if you have 3,000 contacts
versus 300 contacts,
it launches in pretty much the
same amount of time instead
of ten times as much time.
So make sure to test your
app with large data sets.
And the way to do that is to think about
the critical methods in your application.
So in terms of contacts,
it's a table view app.
So you have to make sure sections
are loaded quickly and the
index bar is loaded quickly,
and then whatever visible
cells are loaded quickly.
And one way to do that is to make
sure you store the section counts and
titles into some side table in your
database or somewhere else so that
you don't have to load the entire
data set just to group by sections.
And Core Data users actually get this
for free in the fetch results controller.
So make sure to check that out and
make sure you're doing the most
efficient thing with large data sets.
So in conclusion,
to make your app faster,
you have to profile your app.
And once you figure out
what the hot spots are,
do it faster, do it later, don't do it.
Follow those general performance
strategies to figure out a way
to make your application faster.
And remember to test your
application not just as a bare
application but with large data sets.
And I'll hand it over to Tim to
talk about event handling.
Thanks, Ben.
All right.
So besides app launch,
the rest of the time your
users are using your app,
the thing that matters
most is event handling.
When somebody touches a button
or does a swipe or gestures,
handling those events quickly is the
key to maintaining responsiveness.
And the thing that you want to
remember is that handling pretty
much all of these events is all
about keeping the main run loop free.
All these events end up
happening on the main run loop,
except for a few cases where
the API explicitly lets you
handle them on another queue.
So keep in mind that the main
run loop is the one that matters.
So here's an illustration
of what that means.
So when an event comes in,
it gets processed by your run loop.
You'll do some layout,
you'll do some drawing or whatever.
And one at a time, you'll get processed,
and things will happen normally.
The problem happens when
events are handled slowly.
What can happen then is
you'll get your event in,
and this is moving around
a little bit slower.
And in the meantime,
another event's come in, and another one.
And by then,
the user has done some action,
and your main run loop has not gone
around quickly enough to process it.
So now the user's waiting.
So we want to avoid this,
and there's a few ways to handle this,
a few strategies.
So the simplest is just...
[Transcript missing]
So in this case, I happen to know my app
just like you'll know yours.
And I know that "Did control did
change?" is really the call that
gets called when I switch tabs.
So just like in the beginning of main,
instead of main will be "Did control
did change?" We keep some time.
And down here...
We print again.
The difference between the
end time and the start time.
And you may notice here that
There's this dispatch async,
which Bennett explained earlier,
but there's actually the second one,
and this one can come up
and is a little bit tricky.
So what's going on here is
that the first time through,
it could be the case that this block,
which is dispatched asynchronously,
may happen before Core Animation gets
to doing its layout and drawing for
this particular turn of the run loop.
Now,
the thing that'll tip you off here is
that if you log on the outside and then
log within the first dispatch block,
you'll have pretty much the same time.
And it'll be unusually fast.
So in that case,
you can try this trick of dispatching it
again to make sure that you've captured
the time that Core Animation is using.
So I'm going to build and run it here.
Killing off the app.
And here we go.
So now we see the
launch time from before.
And we see that it took about 400
milliseconds to load one of the tabs.
And if we're switching here,
It's taken about 450-ish
milliseconds between switching tabs.
That's--again, it's okay.
It's not great.
We'd like to keep our interactions down
within a couple hundred milliseconds.
I mean, ideally, it's instantaneous, but,
you know, you do the best that you can.
So the next step, as usual,
is to take a time profile.
So I'm gonna fire up Instruments again.
Do the same trick that
Ben did with deferred mode.
Hit record and switch tabs.
So I'm switching,
and I'm switching again.
All right.
Now we can see very clearly here what
the times are when we're switching tabs.
So just like before,
we can use the inspection
range to zoom in.
What I'm going to do here is
actually use a keyboard shortcut.
I'm going to hold Option and drag,
and that will also create
the inspection range.
So you can see here there's
500-ish milliseconds.
And I'm going to use Shift to zoom in.
How do we take a look at this trace?
So the easiest thing to do is
start with this extended detail,
which will give you a backtrace of
the hottest backtrace that you've got.
You know, you could go down here and you
can expand this tree and manually
look at the times on the side.
and look for things that
take an unusually long time.
But this thing on the side actually
gives you a shortcut into doing that.
So for example,
one of the hot traces here
we see is UILabelDrawRect.
And looking at the app,
we can see that there are actually
a lot of labels going on here.
For every session,
there's the session title and the name,
and there's quite a few of these.
So this makes sense,
which is always a good thing.
The question is,
what can we do about this?
Well, first,
before you even try to fix label drawing,
you want to confirm that your
hypothesis is actually a problem.
So I'm going to go back to the app.
And I'm going to confirm this.
You know, it's label drawing,
and it's actually largely
here in NSString Drawing Rect.
So it's actually doing
the string drawing.
An easy way to confirm that this is a
problem is to just not draw the strings.
We'll keep the views to make sure that
it's not view processing and whatnot.
So I can go to -- let me see.
And what I'm going to do
is just remove this text.
So we'll keep the views around.
And see what that does.
This is the process of confirming
the hypothesis from the workflow
that we saw in the beginning.
So we'll run the app again.
So the idea here is that if you
don't see enough improvement,
it's really not worth spending a
lot of time optimizing this case.
I mean, you can see here that this
is not a shippable app.
But in the meantime,
it's gotten really fast.
At least 100-- almost
150 milliseconds faster.
Okay, so now we have an avenue of
optimization that we can pursue.
What can we do to maintain
a shippable app while--
while maintaining the speed.
So going back to the principles and
strategies that Ben talked about before,
one thing that we can do is
precompute or don't do it again.
So the labels are actually something
that you're doing all the time.
A lot of the room titles are the same.
So even the lab sessions
have common names.
So there's actually a lot
of redundant work there.
So one thing about redundant work
is you can save doing it multiple
times if you just cache it.
So what I'm going to do is I'm
going to cache the labels as
I've already done this,
because it's not exactly
a trivial thing to do.
So I'm caching the labels,
and basically what this does is it
replaces the UI labels in the app with
[Transcript missing]
We're down to the 300
millisecond range again.
You'll notice that it's quicker later.
You know, we're down in the 200s,
because, again, this is a cache,
and ideally what I would
do is save it on disk.
But, you know, this is incremental,
so... Again, you can see in the app.
We have text, and it's quicker.
So this is kind of the
cycle that you go through.
From here, I would go on to time profile,
look for something else,
and optimize again.
But this is the general workflow
through the circle that we saw earlier.
So besides doing this process
and minimizing the time,
making your algorithm faster and doing
trade-offs and things of that sort,
you can just get work
off of the main thread.
That will leave your main thread time
to process events and be responsive.
And there's two main
ways that this happens.
Implicit and explicit.
So implicitly,
there are lots of frameworks
that will take care of things
for you behind your back.
Because we know that
things take a long time.
The view and layer animations.
Not the drawing, but the animations when
things move across the screen.
That happens in a separate process
and your app is not responsible
for it after it's set it up.
The next is layer compositing.
After you've drawn your layers
and created your view hierarchy,
the actual processing of
that hierarchy happens,
again, off in another process.
And another very,
very interesting one is ping decoding.
Oftentimes,
you might look at a trace and wonder,
how is this so fast?
And notice a lot of ping
decoding in the background.
So what generally happens is ping
decoding will dispatch off into the
background and use multiple cores even
and then come back to the main thread.
Now, one very important thing to remember
is that scrolling is not an animation.
It sets up a timer that happens
on the main run loop and processes
events on the main run loop.
So keep that part of Snappy.
Explicit concurrency is
where you guys get control.
And there's a few ways that you can
exploit having multiple threads.
The easiest, the quickest,
is Grand Central Dispatch.
There's lots of information about it.
I hope you all love it like I do.
If you need a little bit more control,
there's NSOperationQueue.
It lets you have some
control over the widths,
a little bit more control
over priority and tasks,
a little bit more setup,
but sometimes it's useful.
And finally,
NSThread gives you full control
over what thread everything runs on.
Now, here's an example of where you might
want to use Grand Central Dispatch.
And this is a case of doing it later,
I suppose.
So let's say you're in the middle of an
animation and you get an event that says,
you know, you should update something by
reading something off a string.
Reading something off a disk, sorry.
And by doing so,
you've now dropped a frame
because the time to read
something off a disk is not quick.
So it's pretty simple.
You dispatch it off
onto a background queue,
and then things proceed
normally as if you did no work.
and doing the code is almost
as simple as visualizing it.
You have your original code
that's synchronously grabbing
something off of disk,
setting a text field.
You wrap the whole thing
in a dispatch async,
do it in the background,
and then this is key,
you have to dispatch back
to the main thread if you're
doing something with UIKit.
Thread safety we'll
talk about in a second.
So a few gotchas with GCD.
It is possible to have
GCD spawn too many threads.
And this is actually a problem.
There's significant overhead, well,
depending on how many threads you have.
There is overhead with
having too many threads.
So this can happen.
And there's also a physical
hard limit on the number of
threads that can get spawned.
And you don't want that to happen.
Bad things happen.
So how can this happen
and how can you avoid it?
So it's pretty simple.
You start with one of the
global concurrent queues.
You dispatch some blocks onto it.
And they're running and
they're doing their thing.
This is fine.
And the problem comes in when these
blocks do something that takes a long
time and is waiting on something.
If you're waiting for the network,
you're waiting for disk, lock,
something like that,
then these guys are blocked.
The system detects that and figures, oh,
we can do some more work.
So let's find some more threads.
And this is okay as long as
this doesn't go on in a loop.
Because then you'll just
get an explosion of threads.
And it's actually pretty innocuous.
The code that can spawn
this looks pretty innocuous.
So be careful for things that --
where you're synchronously blocking
in a loop in a dispatch block.
Some solutions to this.
Serial queue.
You know,
just don't do things concurrently.
Sometimes that's okay.
If things are going on quick,
or you don't need things immediately,
this works.
Dispatch sources is one option,
which will control the dispatching
of blocks onto those queues,
so it's not happening behind your back.
This is a case where NSOperationQueue,
which has a concurrency width option,
and that will limit the number
of threads that get spawned.
And finally,
if you're just doing NSURL connections,
just use the async methods.
It'll take care of it.
So, pretty easy solutions.
Thread safety.
Like I mentioned before,
there are some cases where you need to be
careful about what threads things run on.
So the big gotcha is UIKit.
In many cases, in most cases,
UIKit can only be called
on the main thread.
If you call it on the main thread,
bad things happen.
Or they could,
and that gets harder to debug.
There are some exceptions.
There's actually talk
about this yesterday.
You can refer back to
the videos and notes.
UI image, UI graphics,
those are actually okay to
use in the background and
can be used very effectively.
A couple other frameworks.
Most of the rest of Cocoa, Cocoa Touch,
is thread safe insofar as you can
use multiple objects from any thread,
but you can only use them once at a time.
So you need to either dispatch
onto the same thread to use them,
or the same queue,
or lock around access to them.
And finally, there are libraries that
are completely thread safe.
You don't have to worry about it at all.
They'll do their own locking.
The one that you might be familiar
with is Objective-C introspection.
So you're calling in to
getting information about
your Objective-C objects.
You don't need a lock.
You can do this from multiple threads.
And Objective-C will handle it for you.
Don't do it too much,
because you might get into a
contention with that one massive lock.
And then in that case,
you will have to use system trace
to figure out what's going on.
And we'll have a demo of that in a bit.
There are also possibly third party
frameworks that could lead you there.
Finally, background queues.
We introduced this a few releases ago,
but it bears repeating.
These background queues,
dispatch queue priority background
is extremely low priority.
I/O is throttled, your CPU is throttled.
Basically, you're telling the system,
"I really don't care when this finishes.
Just do it whenever you've got
time." This can take seconds,
tens of seconds, minutes.
Only dispatch things onto this queue,
into this priority, when you really don't
care when it finishes.
If you actually care,
then use dispatch priority low.
And finally,
getting work off the main thread is good.
There are cases when
You'll notice that you're not
spending a whole lot of time
CPU-wise on the main thread,
but your thread's blocked.
And this is also a problem,
because you're not processing events.
So you'll look into time
profiler and it's like,
there's nothing going on here.
What's the deal?
And there are various causes for this.
Disk network, locking, etc.
So how can you figure this out?
Like I said, time profiler,
it's kind of hard to find.
You pretty much have to go
to the CPU strategy view,
look at individual call traces at the
beginning and end of this long blank
space and try to deduce what's going on.
You can use record waiting threads.
That will actually give you the
back traces of the threads while
they're not running on the CPU.
And that can be effective.
But really system trace
is the way to go here.
So what I've got here
is a pretty simple app.
It just has a button,
and it's a button that you can press.
And in response to the button press,
it sends a synchronous URL request.
I know it's kind of a tired example,
but it's one that works every single
time to lock up your main thread
to show you how System Trace works.
So let me show you the app.
So the idea is you click "Load
URL," and this might take a while.
It took two seconds because the Wi-Fi in
this room is pretty bad right now.
So how do we detect this?
Now,
if you looked at this in time profile,
you would see almost no
time on the main thread,
almost no CPU time on the main thread.
But if you take a look at System Trace,
which I'll switch to --
If you take a look at System Trace,
you can use it to find blocking
system calls on the main thread.
So I'm just going to click record.
And then I'm going to click Load URL.
And it says it took 1.5
seconds to load that URL.
And as I said,
if you looked at this in System Trace,
you would see almost no
work on the main thread.
Now, if you're an advanced user,
you'll love System Trace because it
logs all sorts of system operations,
such as scheduling events, VM events,
and system calls.
In this case,
we are just going to look at system
calls for this demonstration.
And my application was called
Synchronous URL Tester,
and I'm going to focus
on that application,
and I'm going to click on the
arrow here to focus on all the
system calls on its main thread.
And as I said,
The basic idea is to look at the wait
time of system calls on the main thread.
So I'm going to sort by
wait time descending,
and you can actually click on
each of these system calls and
get a back trace for how long it
took that system call to complete.
So some of these are
actually pretty innocent.
So for instance,
here's a 73 millisecond wait time,
and it's in a call stack
that's actually pretty bare.
It's just your event
loop waiting for events.
So that's good.
That means your event loop
is waiting for events,
and it's actually responsive.
Now, the problem is if you--in this case,
there's a 1.5 second block.
And you have a call stack
that is in this case.
View controller did press button and it
calls to send synchronous URL request.
So that's what you're
looking for in system trace.
You'll focus on the main thread,
sort by wait time descending,
and see if there are any back
traces in event processing.
And so that's sort of a quick
way to find blocking system
calls on your main thread.
Okay.
So just to wrap up,
if you take notes on this,
if you're doing nothing
else away from this talk,
remember to profile your application.
That's the key to improving
your application's launch time.
Understand app launch to figure out
what's going on in those time profiles.
And avoid blocking the main thread
using dispatch and other techniques.
For more information,
contact our developer evangelist,
Michael Jurowicz.
The iOS app programming guide has
a nice flow chart of different
phases of application launch.
And you can ask us
questions on the dev forums.
That's all.